# Contribution guidelines

Above anything else in this document: we do not perfectly hold to the guidelines
below but we do our best to work towards them. Active codebases will readily
deteriorate with time unless explicit efforts are made to reverse deterioration.

Good and bad decisions compound and the goal of this document is to get you
making good decisions that help build Gram up as a useful and high-quality
product.

## Preamble

<details open>
<summary>Why do we even have this document?</summary>

**The world is full of APIs that we want AI agents to leverage effectively.**

Gram is an exploration into how we can take that vast space of APIs and create
the right bridges to them for AI agents. We welcome ideas as much as code
contributions that serve this goal.

**Open source as a team effort.**

The goal of open sourcing Gram is to recognize that we solve problems better
as a community rather than as a walled off teams and give confidence to those
that want to use the service either through Speakeasy or self-hosted. For Gram
to succeed as useful product, we want to welcome contributors that share our
values and goals around building high-quality products for the Agentic AI
frontier.

**High quality products are built from high quality decisions.**

The goal of these guidelines and any roadmap plans made in Gram is to ensure we
are solving the right problems to connect AI agents to the sprawl of APIs in the
world. This may mean we choose to work on some things over others or reject
proposals that we do not believe serve this goal. We encourage productive
discussions and opinions that are grounded in research and ultimately lead us
to make good decisions when building Gram.

</details>

## General practices

<details open>
<summary>High-level behaviors we're looking for</summary>

**Readability, maintainability, strong conventions and the long view.**

We want to be fast at every stage of developing Gram. We're not going to over-
index on throwing code into production with no checks and balances when it means
we'll sink into a tarpit of bugs and incidents months from now. There is a
widely-applicable definition of "fast iteration speed" that includes not making
messes along the way. Establishing guardrails and conventions in coding and
codebase structure means we can increase our iteration speed by adding well-
aligned contributors. Everyone will benefit from this: current and future
users and contributors.

**You are the first reviewer of your AI assistant's contributions.**

You are responsible for all the work that you and your assistants produce. You
must be the first reviewer of all your work before requesting reviews from
anyone else.

**Add tests for all new contributions.**

Coding agents and assistants are fantastically effective at this. Utilize them
if you can but always review their work to ensure that they are indeed testing
the changes you/they make. The goal is not to hit 100% test coverage but to have
higher and higher confidence that the code you write does what you expect it to
do and enable others to maintain it well.

**Add documentation whenever possible.**

We document how we deploy Gram, how we manage the database schema and migrations
and how we manage infrastructure. A lot of this documentation should act as a
sort of runbook that aids new contributors and incident responders. If you are
materially affecting any of these areas, please add documentation to help others
understand how to operate Gram.

**Code comments are great.**

We are not prescriptive about code comments but we encourage them. Particularly
on methods and exported types since these greatly help coding assistants
understand the codebase without having to always to consider all logic.

**Code reviews are great.**

We review all contributions to Gram and will favor pull requests that are small
and focused over massive and far reaching ones. We have no preference or
expectations for how you structure your commits since we squash all commits on
merge. We do however appreciate contributors that spend any time to structure
their work if size of change is large.

Above all, we expect folks to spend non-zero effort adding a meaningful pull
request title and description since these will contribute to the changelog.

**Too much nesting kills readability.**

Our brains are very slow code interpreters. We can help them along by managing
code complexity to optimize for readability. _Functions that have 4 or more
levels of nested code where branches have substantial amounts of business
logic are heavily discouraged._ The contrived example below is the upper bound
of what we consider comprehensible code:

```go
func doSomething() error {
	for event := range events {
		switch event.Type {
			case EventTypeA:
				val, err := lookupDatabase(event.ID)
				if err != nil {
					return fmt.Errorf("lookup event: %w", err)
				}

				res, err := callAPI(val.URL)
				var tempErr *TemporaryError
				if errors.As(err, &tempErr) {
					continue
				} else if err != nil {
					return fmt.Errorf("call api: %w", err)
				}
			case EventTypeB:
				// ...
			case EventTypeC:
				// ...
			default:
				// ...
		}
	}

	return nil
}
```

Note that trivial `if err != nil` branches are discounted here.

_We **do not** subscribe to concepts like cyclomatic complexity or lines of
code, only a simple metric of how nested is business logic in a region of code._
For non-trivial changes and additions, review your code and consider if it can
be broken up to promote a [line-of-sight][los] and in turn improve readability.
To reiterate: long functions are usually fine, wide functions are often not.
As with most/all rules, there are certainly exceptions to this rule but they
will be very rare.

[los]: https://medium.com/@matryer/line-of-sight-in-code-186dd7cdea88

</details>
